Add documentation for query insights - query metrics feature (#7846)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _observing-your-data/query-insights/query-metrics.md

---
layout: default
title: Query metrics
parent: Query insights
nav_order: 20
---

# Query metrics

> Query metrics involves comprehensive instrumentation along the search path to capture key [metrics](#metrics), such as aggregation types, query types, latency, and resource usage per query type. OpenTelemetry (OTel) is the instrumentation framework. The telemetry data can be consumed using OTel metrics [exporters]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/distributed-tracing/#exporters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Key query [metrics](https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/pull/7846#metrics), such as aggregation types, query types, latency, and resource usage per query type, are captured along the search path by using the OpenTelemetry (OTel) instrumentation framework. The telemetry data can be consumed using OTel metrics [exporters]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/distributed-tracing/#exporters).
```

> Query metrics involves comprehensive instrumentation along the search path to capture key [metrics](#metrics), such as aggregation types, query types, latency, and resource usage per query type. Open Telemetry (oTel) is the instrumentation framework. The telemetry data can be consumed using oTel metrics [exporters]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/distributed-tracing/#exporters).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Query metrics involves comprehensive instrumentation along the search path to capture key [metrics](#metrics), such as aggregation types, query types, latency, and resource usage per query type. OpenTelemetry (OTel) is the instrumentation framework. The telemetry data can be consumed using OTel metrics [exporters]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/distributed-tracing/#exporters).
```

Reviewer 2: Instrumentation refers to the tools and processes used to collect, measure, and report data about the performance and behavior of a system. How about "Query metrics _uses_ comprehensive instrumentation along the search path to capture key [metrics](#metrics), such as aggregation types, query types, latency, and resource usage per query type."?

> Query metrics involves comprehensive instrumentation along the search path to capture key [metrics](#metrics), such as aggregation types, query types, latency, and resource usage per query type. Open Telemetry (oTel) is the instrumentation framework. The telemetry data can be consumed using oTel metrics [exporters]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/distributed-tracing/#exporters).

Reviewer: The first phrase of the first sentence is too vague and doesn't entirely work. How/in what way does "query metrics" involve something? What comprehensive instrumentation (is this information necessary?)? I would just combine the first two sentences.

Reviewer 2: @natebower "Instrumentations" refers to the tools and processes used to collect, measure, and report data about the performance and behavior of a system. How about "Query metrics _uses_ comprehensive instrumentation along the search path to capture key [metrics](#metrics), such as aggregation types, query types, latency, and resource usage per query type."

Reviewer: If "query metrics" are a generic noun, then it should be "Query metrics _use_", but that still reads oddly because we have metrics capturing other metrics. As written, we seem to be treating "Query Metrics" as a proper noun syntactically.

Reviewer 2: OK, let's ask @deshsidd: Could you please address this comment? Thanks.

Author: Agree with @natebower last comment. @kolchfa-aws you can go forward with this change and we can merge this.

> ## Configuring query metrics

Reviewer: Here and in the following sentence, it reads as though we're either configuring a tool named query metrics or literally configuring individual metrics. Is either of those our intended meaning? Do we mean something like "Configure query metric generation"?

> ## Configuring query metrics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Configuring query metric generation
```

> To configure query metrics, use the following steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To configure query metric generation, use the following steps.
```

### Step 1: Install the Query Insights plugin

For information about installing the Query Insights plugin, see [Installing the Query Insights plugin]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/query-insights/index/#installing-the-query-insights-plugin).

### Step 2: Install the OpenTelemetry plugin

For information about installing the OpenTelemetry plugin, see [Distributed tracing]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/distributed-tracing/).

### Step 3: Enable query metrics

Enable query metrics by configuring the following `opensearch.yml` settings:

```yaml
telemetry.feature.metrics.enabled: true
search.query.metrics.enabled: true
```
{% include copy.html %}

> The following is a complete sample configuration that includes telemetry configuration:

Reviewer: Should "a" precede "telemetry"?

> The following is a complete sample configuration that includes telemetry configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is a complete sample configuration that includes a telemetry configuration:
```

```yaml
# Enable query metrics feature
search.query.metrics.enabled: true
telemetry.feature.metrics.enabled: true

> # oTel-related confuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# OTel-related configuration
```

opensearch.experimental.feature.telemetry.enabled: true
telemetry.tracer.sampler.probability: 1.0
telemetry.feature.tracer.enabled: true
```
{% include copy.html %}

> Alternatively, you can configure query metrics using the API:

Reviewer: Same comment re: "configure query metrics".

> Alternatively, you can configure query metrics using the API:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can configure query metric generation using the API:
```

```json
PUT _cluster/settings
{
  "persistent" : {
    "search.query.metrics.enabled" : true
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Configure the export of metrics and traces using a gRPC exporter. For more information, see [Exporters]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/trace/distributed-tracing/#exporters). You can skip this step if you use the [default logging exporter](#default-logging-exporter):

Reviewer: This is a good example of what I mean re: "query metrics" above. Here we clarify what's actually being configured.

```yaml
telemetry.otel.tracer.span.exporter.class: io.opentelemetry.exporter.otlp.trace.OtlpGrpcSpanExporter
telemetry.otel.metrics.exporter.class: io.opentelemetry.exporter.otlp.metrics.OtlpGrpcMetricExporter
```
{% include copy.html %}

## Metrics

> Query metrics support the following measurements:

Reviewer: Same comment re: "Query metrics". They support the following measurements how/in what way? Can query metrics themselves literally support measurements?

Reviewer 2: Changed to "provide"

> Query metrics support the following measurements:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Query metrics provide the following measurements:
```

> - The number of queries per query type (for example, the number of `match` or `regex` queries).

Reviewer: These technically don't need periods because they aren't complete sentences and don't complete the introductory stem.

> - The number of queries per query type (for example, the number of `match` or `regex` queries).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The number of queries per query type (for example, the number of `match` or `regex` queries)
```

> - The number of queries per aggregation type (for example, the number of `terms` aggregation queries).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The number of queries per aggregation type (for example, the number of `terms` aggregation queries)
```

> - The number of queries per sort order (for example, the number of ascending and descending `sort` queries).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The number of queries per sort order (for example, the number of ascending and descending `sort` queries)
```

> - Histograms of `latency` for each query type, aggregation type, and sort order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Histograms of `latency` for each query type, aggregation type, and sort order
```

> - Histograms of `cpu` for each query type, aggregation type, and sort order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Histograms of `cpu` for each query type, aggregation type, and sort order
```

> - Histograms of `memory` for each query type, aggregation type, and sort order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Histograms of `memory` for each query type, aggregation type, and sort order
```

## Default logging exporter

> By default, if no gRPC exporters are configured, then the metrics and traces are exported to log files. The data is saved under the `opensearch/logs` directory in the following files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, if no gRPC exporters are configured, then the metrics and traces are exported to log files. The data is saved in the `opensearch/logs` directory in the following files:
```
